NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

TO 

LORENZO THE MAGNIFICENT 

SON OF PIERO DI MEDICI 

IT is customary for those who wish to gain the 
favour of a prince to endeavour to do so by offer- 
ing him gifts of those things which they hold 
most precious, or in which they know him to take 
especial delight. In this way princes are often 
presented with horses, arms, cloth of gold, gems, 
and such-like ornaments worthy of their grandeur. 
In my desire, however, to offer to Your Highness 
some humble testimony of my devotion, I have 
been unable to find among my possessions anything 
which I hold so dear or esteem so highly as that 
knowledge of the deeds of great men which I have 
acquired through a long experience of modern 
events and a constant study of the past. 

The results of my long observations and reflec- 
tions are recorded in the little volume which I now 
offer to Your Highness : and although I deem this 
work unworthy of Your Highness's notice, yet my 
confidence in your humanity assures me that you 
will accept it, knowing that it is not in my power 



2 NICCOI/) MACHIAVELL1 

to offer you a greater gift than that of enabling 
you to understand in the shortest possible time all 
those things which I have learnt through danger 
and suffering in the course of many years. I have 
not sought to adorn my work with long phrases or 
high-sounding words or any of those allurements 
and ornaments with which many writers seek to 
embellish their books, as I desire no honour for my 
work but such as its truth and the gravity of its 
subject may justly deserve. Nor will it, I trust, 
be deemed presumptuous on the part of a man of 
humble and obscure condition to attempt to discuss 
and criticise the government of princes ; for in 
the same way that landscape painters station them- 
selves in the valleys in order to draw mountains or 
elevated ground, and ascend an eminence in order 
to get a good view of the plains, so it is necessary 
to be a prince to be able to know thoroughly the 
nature of a people, and to know the nature of 
princes one must be one of the populace. 

May I trust, therefore, that Your Highness will 
accept this little gift in the spirit in which it is 
offered ; and if Your Highness will deign to peruse 
it, you will recognise in it my ardent desire that 
you may attain to that grandeur which fortune and 
your own merits presage for you. 

And should Your Highness gaze down from the 
summit of that eminence towards this humble spot, 
you will recognise the great and unmerited suffer- 
ings inflicted on me by a cruel fate. 



THE PRINCE 



CHAPTER I 

THE VARIOUS KINDS OP GOVERNMENT AND THE 
WAYS BY WHIC1I THEY ARE ESTABLISHED 

ALL states and dominions which hold or have 
held sway over mankind are either republics or 
monarchies. Monarchies are either hereditary 
ones, in which the rulers have been for many years 
of the same family, or else they are those of recent 
foundation. The newly founded ones are either 
entirely new, as was Milan to Francesco Sforza, or 
else they are, as it were, new members grafted on 
to the hereditary possessions of the prince that 
annexes them, as is the kingdom of Naples to the 
King of Spain. The dominions thus acquired have 
either been previously accustomed to the rule of 
another prince, or else have been free states, and 
they are annexed either by force of arms of the 
prince, or of others, or else fall to him by good 
fortune or merit. 



CHAPTER II 

OF HEREDITARY MONARCHIES 

I WILL not here speak of republics, having already 
treated of them fully in another place. I will deal 
only with monarchies, and will show how the 
various kinds described above can be governed and 
maintained. In the first place, in hereditary states 
accustomed to the reigning family the difficulty of 
maintaining them is far less than in new monarchies ; 
for it is sufficient not to exceed the ancestral usages, 
and to accommodate one's self to accidental circum- 
stances ; in this way such a prince, if of ordinary 
ability, will always be able to maintain his position, 
unless some very exceptional and excessive force 
deprives him of it ; and even if he be thus deprived 
of it, on the slightest misfortune happening to the 
new occupier, he will be able to regain it. 

We have in Italy the example of the Duke of 
Ferrara, who was able to withstand the assaults of 
the Venetians in the year '84, and of Pope Julius 
in the year '10, for no other reason than because 
of the antiquity of his family in that dominion. In 
as much as the legitimate prince has less cause and 
less necessity to give offence, it is only natural that 
he should be more loved ; and, if no extraordi- 
nary vices make him hated, it is only reasonable for 
his subjects to be naturally attached to him, the 
memories and causes of innovations being forgotten 
in the long period over which his rule has existed ; 
whereas one change always leaves the way prepared 
for the introduction of another. 



CHAPTER III 

OF MIXED MONARCHIES 

Bur it is in the new monarchy that difficulties 
really exist. Firstly, if it is not entirely new, but 
a member as it were of a mixed state, its disorders 
spring at first from a natural difficulty which exists 
in all new dominions, because men change masters 
willingly, hoping to better themselves ; and this 
belief makes them take arms against their rulers, 
in which they are deceived, as experience shows 
them that they have gone from bad to worse. This 
is the result of another very natural cause, which is 
the necessary harm inflicted on those over whom 
the prince obtains dominion, both by his soldiers and 
by an infinite number of other injuries unavoidably 
caused by his occupation. 

Thus you find enemies in all those whom you 
have injured by occupying that dominion, and you 
cannot maintain the friendship of those who have 
helped you to obtain this possession, as you will not 
be able to fulfil their expectations, nor can you use 
strong measures with them, being under an obliga- 
tion to them ; for which reason, however strong 
your armies may be, you will always need the 
favour of the inhabitants to take possession of a 
province. It was from these causes that Louis XII. 
of France, though able to occupy Milan without 
trouble, immediately lost it, and the forces of 



6 NICCOL6 MACHIAVELL1 

Ludovico alone were sufficient to take it from him 
the first time, for the inhabitants who had willingly- 
opened their gates to him, finding themselves 
deluded in the hopes they had cherished and not 
obtaining those benefits that they had anticipated, 
could not bear the vexatious rule of their new prince. 
It is indeed true that, after reconquering the 
rebel territories they are not so easily lost again, 
for the ruler is now, by the fact of the rebellion, 
less averse to secure his position by punishing 
offenders, investigating any suspicious circumstances, 
and strengthening himself in weak places. So that 
although the mere appearance of such a person 
as Duke Ludovico on the frontier was sufficient to 
cause France to lose Milan the first time, to make 
her lose her grip of it the second time was only 
possible when all the world was against her, and 
after her enemies had been defeated and driven out 
of Italy ; which was the result of the causes above 
mentioned. Nevertheless it was taken from her 
both the first and the second time. The general 
causes of the first loss have been already discussed ; 
it remains now to be seen what were the causes of 
the second loss and by what means France could 
have avoided it, or what measures might have been 
taken by another ruler in that position which were 
not taken by the King of France. Be it observed, 
therefore, that those states which on annexation are 
united to a previously existing state may or may 
not be of the same nationality and language. If 
they are, it is very easy to hold them, especially if 
they are not accustomed to freedom ; and to possess 
them securely it suffices that the family of the 
princes which formerly governed them be extinct. 
For the rest, their old condition not being disturbed, 
and there being no dissimilarity of customs, the 
people settle down quietly under their new rulers, 
as is seen in the case of Burgundy, Brittany, 
Gascony, and Normandy, which have been so long 



THE PRINCE 7 

united to France ; and although there may be some 
slight differences of language, the customs of the 
people are nevertheless similar, and they can get 
along well together, and whoever obtains possession 
of them and wishes to retain them must bear in 
mind two things : the one, that the blood of their 
old rulers is extinct ; the other, to make no altera- 
tion either in their laws or in their taxes ; in this 
way they will in a very short space of time become 
united with their old possessions and form one 
state. But when dominions are acquired in a 
province differing in language, laws, and customs, 
the difficulties to be overcome are great, and it 
requires good fortune as well as great industry to 
retain them ; one of the best and most certain 
means of doing so would be for the new ruler to 
take up his residence in them. This would render 
their possession more secure and durable, it is what 
the Turk has done in Greece ; in spite of all the 
other measures taken by him to hold that state, it 
would not have been possible to retain it had he 
not gone to live there. Being on the spot, dis- 
orders can be seen as they arise and can quickly 
be remedied, but living at a distance, they are only 
heard of when they get beyond remedy. Besides 
which, the province is not despoiled by your officials, 
the subjects are pleased with the easy accessibility 
of their prince ; and wishing to be loyal they have 
more reason to love him, and should they be other- 
wise they will have greater cause to fear him. 

Any external Power who wishes to assail that 
state will be less disposed to do so ; so that as long 
as he resides there he will be very hard to dis- 
possess. The other and better remedy is to plant 
colonies in one or two of those places which form 
as it were the keys of the land, for it is necessary 
either to do this or to maintain a large force of 
armed men. The colonies will cost the prince 
little ; with little or no expense on his part, he 



8 NICCOLt) MACH1AVELL1 

can send and maintain them ; he only injures 
those whose lands and houses are taken to give to 
the new inhabitants, and these form but a small 
proportion of the state, and those who are injured, 
remaining poor and scattered, can never do any harm 
to him, and all the others are, on the one hand, not 
injured and therefore easily pacified ; and, on the 
other, are fearful of offending lest they should be 
treated like those who have been dispossessed of 
their property. To conclude, these colonies cost 
nothing, are more faithful, and give less offence ; 
and the injured parties being poor and scattered 
are unable to do mischief, as I have shown. For 
it must be noted, that men must either be caressed 
or else annihilated ; they will revenge themselves 
for small injuries, but cannot do so for great ones ; 
the injury therefore that we do to a man must be 
such that we need not fear his vengeance. But by 
maintaining a garrison instead of colonists, one will 
spend much more, and consume in guarding it all 
the revenues of that state, so that the acquisition 
will result in a loss, besides giving much greater 
offence, since it injures every one in that state with 
the quartering of the army on it ; which being an 
inconvenience felt by all, every one becomes an 
enemy, and these are enemies which can do mischief, 
as, though beaten, they remain in their own homes. 
In every way, therefore, a garrison is as useless as 
colonies are useful. Further, the ruler of a foreign 
province as described, should make himself the 
leader and defender of his less powerful neighbours, 
and endeavour to weaken the stronger ones, and 
take care that his possessions are not entered by 
some foreigner not less powerful than himself, who 
will always intervene at the request of those who 
are discontented either through ambition or fear, 
as was seen when the ^Etoli invited the Romans into 
Greece ; and in whatever province they entered, it 
was always at the request of the inhabitants. And 



THE PRINCE 9 

the rule is that when a powerful foreigner enters a 
province, all the less powerful inhabitants become 
his adherents, jnoved by the envy they bear to 
those ruling over them ; so much so that with 
regard to these minor potentates he has no trouble 
whatever in winning them over, for they willingly 
join forces with the state that he has acquired. 
He has merely to be careful that they do not 
assume too much power and authority, and he can 
easily with his own forces and their favour put 
down those that are powerful and remain in every- 
thing the arbiter of that province. And he who 
does not govern well in this way will soon lose 
what he has acquired, and while he holds it will 
meet with infinite difficulty and trouble. 

The Romans in the provinces they took, always 
followed this policy ; they established colonies, 
flattered the less powerful without increasing their 
strength, put down the most powerful and did not 
allow foreign rulers to obtain influence in them. 
I will let the single province of Greece suffice as 
an example. They made friends with the Achaei 
and the ^Etoli, the kingdom of Macedonia was 
cast down, and Antiochus driven out, nor did they 
allow the merits of the Achaei or the ^Etoli to 
gain them any increase of territory, nor did the 
persuasions of Philip induce them to befriend him 
without lowering him, nor could the power of 
Antiochus make them consent to allow him to hold 
any state in that province. 

For the Romans did in this case what all wise 
princes should do, who look not only at present 
dangers but also at future ones and diligently guard 
against them ; for being foreseen they can easily be 
remedied, but if one waits till they are at hand, the 
medicine is no longer in time as the malady has 
become incurable ; it happening with this as with 
those hectic fevers spoken of by doctors, which at 
their beginning are easy to cure but difficult to- 



10 NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

recognise, but in course of time when they have 
not at first been recognised and treated, become 
easy to recognise and difficult to cure. Thus it 
happens in matters of state ; for knowing afar off 
(which it is only given to a prudent man to do) the 
evils that are brewing, they are easily cured. But 
when, for want of such knowledge, they are allowed 
to grow so that every one can recognise them, there 
is no longer any remedy to be found. However, 
the Romans, observing these disorders while yet 
remote, were always able to find a remedy, and 
never allowed them to proceed in order to avoid a 
war ; for they knew that war was not to be avoided, 
and could be deferred only to the advantage of the 
other side; they therefore declared war against 
Philip and Antiochus in Greece, so as not to have to 
fight them in Italy, though they might at the time 
have avoided either ; this they did not choose to do, 
never caring to do that which is now every day to 
be heard in the mouths of our wise men, to enjoy 
the benefits of time, but preferring those of their 
own virtue and prudence, for time brings with it all 
things, and may produce indifferently either good 
or evil. But let us return to France and examine 
whether she did any of these things ; and I will 
speak not of Charles, but of Louis as the one whose 
proceedings can be better seen, as he held posses- 
sion in Italy for a longer time ; you will then see 
that he did the opposite of all those things which 
must be done to keep possession of a foreign state. 
King Louis was called into Italy by the ambition 
of the Venetians, who wished by his coming to gam 
half of Lombardy. I will not blame the king for 
coming nor for the part he took, because wishing to 
plant his foot in Italy, and not having friends in 
the country, on the contrary the conduct of King 
Charles having caused all doors to be closed to him, 
he was forced to accept what friendships he could 
find, and his schemes would have quickly been 
